# Gamezoid-SSD-buying-guide: DRAMless drives
If you're in the market for buying an SSD, you might be confused by a lot of the terms that are thrown down online, one thing that seems to come up quite frequently with recommending SSDs to people is dramless SSD's. A dramless SSD is an SSD without a DRAM cache, this short write-up will aim to tell you what a dram cache does, and establish whether or not you should care about your SSD having one.

What is a DRAM cache? On an SSD a DRAM cache is a piece of volatile memory soldered to its PCB, size-wise depending on the drive it could be a few hundred megabytes, or it could be up to 1 or 2 gigabytes. Volatile means that unlike the flash storage on an SSD, it can not store data while unpowered. A DRAM cache is made out of the same type of memory as well, your computers DRAM, it's designed for short term storage of data that needs to be accessed frequently, let's talk about that data and what it means for SSD performance.

On an SSD a DRAM cache is typically used to store metadata, prefetch data, and to act as a read buffer for small IO (Small datasets, or small amounts of information). When we describe metadata we're typically talking about what's called the FTL mapping table, or flash transition layer. This is the most commonly known use of the DRAM cache, it effectively provides an easy map for the SSD controller to know where other data is being stored on its native nand flash. Prefetch data just refers to any data that needs to be accessed by the SSD controller quickly, while being a read cache/buffer just refers to storing frequently read data in DRAM. DRAM is a much faster, and lower latency medium than the SSD's native nand flash which is why we'd want to store this information on it.

If your SSD doesn't have a DRAM cache (is DRAMless), the datasets we just talked about will typically be split between the SSD's PSLC (Pseudo SLC) and SRAM cache, or in the case of NVME it may be stored in your systems host memory, through what's called HMB (Host Memory Buffer). HMB is a higher latency solution than a dedicated DRAM cache, but it is still much lower latency than pulling direct from nand.  

Whether or not it really matters depends on the drive, without a dedicated DRAM cache you are primarily hit in small IO performance at light que depths. DRAMless sata SSD's are practically unrecommendable garbage, and typically perform poorly enough to represent a tangible difference to even light users. Dramless NVME on the other hand is a completely different story. One of NVME's inherit advantages over AHCI (What is used on sata SSD's) is a significant redunction in overall latency, this effectively acts as a counter for the latency penalties brought on by being DRAMless, HMB can help here aswell but there are alternative solutions.
